---
title: A brief introduction to the `MGIS` `C++` library for mechanical behaviours
author: Thomas Helfer
date: 2020
lang: en-EN
numbersections: true
documentclass: article
from: markdown+tex_math_single_backslash
geometry:
  - margin=2cm
papersize: a4
link-citations: true
colorlinks: true
figPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
tabPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
secPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
eqnPrefixTemplate: "($$i$$)"
bibliography: bibliography.bib
---

# Introduction

This introduction is meant to enlight how the use the `MGIS` library in
`C++` to integrate a mechanical behaviour. This document targets
solver developers who wish to integrate `MGIS`.

> **Note**
> 
> This introduction will not describe formally the `MGIS` API
> (Application Programming Interface) which would be tedious. The reader
> may refer to the `doxygen` documentation of the project.

# Creating a `MFront` behaviour

The first step to use `MGIS` is to generate via `MFront` a shared
library which will be loaded by the `MGIS` library.

> **About the MFront/MGIS versions compatibility**
>
> This means that a working implementation of `MFront` is available. The
> user is responsible to use a version of `MFront` compatible with the
> version of `MGIS` he plans to use. This is explicitly discussed in the
> `README.md` file at the root the `MGIS` sources. Failing to use
> compatible versions may lead to various errors.

In this document, we will consider two mechanical behaviours:

- a simple small strain viscoplastic behaviour based on the Norton-Hoff
  Law. This file is available [here](mfront/Norton.mfront).
- a simple finite strain plastic behaviour based on \(J_{2}\) plasticity
  with linear hardening in the logarithmic space (see
  @miehe_anisotropic_2002). This file is available
  [here](mfront/Plasticity.mfront)

Those files can be compiled as follows from the command line[^1]:

~~~~{.bash}
# generate the C++ sources associated
# with the Norton behaviour
$ mfront --interface=generic Norton.mfront
# generate the C++ sources associated
# with the plastic behaviour
$ mfront --interface=generic Plasticity.mfront
# generate the library
$ mfront --obuild
Treating target : all
The following library has been built :
- libBehaviour.so :  Norton_AxisymmetricalGeneralisedPlaneStrain Norton_Axisymmetrical Norton_PlaneStrain Norton_GeneralisedPlaneStrain Norton_Tridimensional Plasticity_AxisymmetricalGeneralisedPlaneStrain Plasticity_Axisymmetrical Plasticity_PlaneStrain Plasticity_GeneralisedPlaneStrain Plasticity_Tridimensional
~~~~

[^1]: For the example, we used the Bourne-again shell (`bash`) syntax here.

The output shows:

- That the compilation process led to the creation of the
  `libBehaviour.so` library.
- That `MFront` has generated one function per behaviour and per
  supported modelling hypothesis.

For the following, it is important to note the name of the behaviour
generated by `MFront`.
 
> **About the `TFEL` libraries**
>
> The generated library `libBehaviour.so` is linked to various libraries
> provided by the `TFEL` project. Those libraries must be available
> in the current environment for the library to be usable in `MGIS`.

# Loading the behaviour, the `Behaviour` object

The `load` function is used to load the behaviour. This function returns
a `Behaviour` object which contains all the relevant information about
the behaviour and a function pointer.

## Small strain behaviours

The first overload of the `load` function takes three parameters:

- the name of the library.
- the name of the function.
- the modelling hypothesis to be used.

~~~~{.cxx}
const auto h = Hypothesis::TRIDIMENSIONAL;
const auto b = load('src/libBehaviour.so', 'Norton', h);
~~~~

> **The `mgis::behaviour` namespace**
>
> The example given in this document assumes that the 
> functions and objects defined in the `mgis::behaviour`
> namespace are available in the current scope.
>
>
> In pratice, this means that the following statement 
> was made earlier:
>
> ~~~~{.cxx}
> using namespace mgis::behaviour;
> ~~~~

## Finite strain behaviours

The second overload of the `load` function specifically handles finite
strain behaviours and takes four parameters:

- options related the stress measure used on input/output and the
  consistenant tangent operator expected.
- the name of the library.
- the name of the function.
- the modelling hypothesis to be used.

The following stress measures are available:

- `CAUCHY`, the Cauchy stress
- `PK1`, the first Piola-Kirchoff stress
- `PK2`, the second Piola-Kirchoff stress

The following tangent operators are available:

- `DSIG_DF`, the derivative of the Cauchy stress with respect to the
  deformation gradient.
- `DS_DEGL`, the derivative of the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress with
  respect to the Green-Lagrange strain.
- `DPK1_DF`, the derivative of the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress with
  respect to the deformation gradient.
- `DTAU_DDF`, the derivative of the Kirchhoff stress with
  respect to the spatial increment of the deformation gradient.

~~~~{.cxx}
const auto h = Hypothesis::TRIDIMENSIONAL;
auto o = FiniteStrainBehaviourOptions{};
o.stress_measure = FiniteStrainBehaviourOptions::PK1;
o.tangent_operator = FiniteStrainBehaviourOptions::DPK1_DF;
const auto b = load(o, 'src/libBehaviour.so', 'Norton', h);
~~~~

## The `Behaviour` object

The `Behaviour` object contains all the metadata required to interact
with the behaviour. A complete description of this object is exceed the
scope of this document. Thus, only the analysis of the material
properties required by the behaviour is discussed here. Handling
external state variables, parameters is made in a very similar manner.

### Material properties

The list of material properties required by the user is defined in the
`mps` data member as a vector of object of the `Variable` type.

The `Variable` data structure is quite simple:

~~~~{.cxx}
struct Variable {
  //! name of the variable
  std::string name;
  //! type of the variable
  enum Type { SCALAR = 0, VECTOR = 1, STENSOR = 2, TENSOR = 3} type;
};  // end of struct Description
~~~~

It contains two data members:

- the name
- the type

For material properties (and external state variables), only scalar
variables are allowed.

With those informations, a solver developer is already able to check the
validity of an input file.

# State of an integration point, memory allocation

With the `Behaviour` data structure, one are able to describe a
behaviour. The next step is to use this information to create one or
more data structures containing the state of an integration point or a
set of integrations points.

Three cases can be met in practice:

1. The developer may choose to associate to each integration point an
  object of the type `BehaviourData` provided by `MGIS`.
2. The developer may choose to use the `MaterialDataManager` provided by
  `MGIS` to handle the data associated with a set of integration
  points.
3. The developer may choose to store the state of the material in its own
  data structures.

Whatever the choice made, at the end, it must be emphasized that the
behaviour integration is based on an object of the type
`BehaviourDataView` which only contains pointers to a previously
allocated memory. A careful study of this data structure may help to
properly design the integration of `MGIS` in the solver and eventually
minimize the data transfer between the code and the `MGIS` (and even,
hopefully, eliminate all data transfer).

Thus, the `BehaviourDataView` structure, and the underlying
`StateView` structure, are now discussed. Then more details
about the three cases described previously are given.

## The `BehaviourDataView` and `StateView` structures

The `BehaviourDataView` data structure contains the following data
members:

- `dt`, the time increment. This is left unmodified by the behaviour
  integration.
- `K`, a pointer to an array which can hold the consistent tangent
  operator computed by the behaviour integration.
- `rdt`: proposed time step increment increase factor
- `s0`: the state of the integration point at the beginning of the time
  step. This is left unmodified by the behaviour integration.
- `s1`: the state of the integration point at the end of the time step.

`s0` and `s1` and instances of the `StateView` structure.

### Description of the initial values stored in `K`

On input, the first element of K must contain the type of type
of stiffness matrix expected. If this value is negative, only
the prediction operator is computed. This value has the
following meaning:

- if K[0] is lower than -2.5, the tangent operator must be
  computed.
- if K[0] is in [-2.5:-1.5]: the secant operator must be
  computed.
- if K[0] is in [-1.5:-0.5]: the elastic operator must be
  computed.
- if K[0] is in [-0.5:0.5]: the behaviour integration is
  performed, but no stiffness matrix.
- if K[0] is in [0.5:1.5]: the elastic operator must be
  computed.
- if K[0] is in [1.5:2.5]: the secant operator must be
  computed.
- if K[0] is in [2.5:3.5]: the secant operator must be
  computed.
- if K[0] is greater than 3.5, the consistent tangent operator
  must be computed.

Other values of K are meant to store behaviour's option. This
is currently only meaningful for finite strain behaviours.

For finite strain behaviours, K[1] holds the choice of the stress
measure used by the behaviour on input/output:

- if K[1] < 0.5, the Cauchy stress is used
- if 0.5 < K[1] < 1.5, the second Piola-Kirchoff stress is used
- if 1.5 < K[1] < 2.5, the first Piola-Kirchoff stress is used

For finite strain behaviours, K[2] holds the choice of the consistent
tangent operator returned by the behaviour:

- if K[2]<0.5, the derivative of the Cauchy stress with respect
  to the deformation gradient is returned
- if 0.5<K[2]<1.5, the derivative of the second Piola-Kirchoff
  stress with respect to the Green-Lagrange strain
  is returned
- if 1.5<K[2]<2.5, the derivative of the first Piola-Kirchoff
  stress with respect to the deformation gradient is returned

It is important to note that, even if no stiffness matrix is requested,
the `K` array must a least be big enough to store the kind of
integration to be performed and the behaviour options.

The `Behaviour` structure contains a static constant variable called
`nopts` containing the maximum number of options that a `Behaviour` may
required. Thus, if no stiffness matrix is requested, `K` must have a
size which is at least `Behaviour::nopts+1`.

It is also important to note that behaviour options are automatically
set by the `integrate` function describe hereafter.

### The `StateView` structure

This `StateView` structure contains the following members, describing
the state of the material at one integration points at a given time:

- `gradients`: pointer to an array containing the values of the
  gradients. This is left unmodified by the behaviour integration.
- `thermodynamic_forces`: pointer to an array containing the values of
  the thermodynamic forces.
- `material_properties`: pointer to an array containing the values of
  the material properties. This is left unmodified by the behaviour
  integration.
- `internal_state_variables`: pointer to an array containing the values of
  the internal state variables.
- `stored_enery`: pointer to the value of the stored energy (computed by
  `@InternalEnergy` in `MFront` files) This output is optional.
- `dissipated_enery`: pointer to the value of the dissipated energy (computed by
  `@DissipatedEnergy` in `MFront` files) This output is optional.
- `external_state_variables`: pointer to an array containing the values
  of the external state variables. This is left unmodified by the
  behaviour integration.

### Memory management

Most data member are thus pointers to a array of values (i.e. a
continous memory block). For efficiency, the size of those arrays are
not stored in the `StateView` structure, which means that the developer
is responsible of allocating the memory properly.

If one uses the data structure `BehaviourData` or the
`MaterialDataManager` data structure provided by `MGIS`, which are
described below, this is automatically ensured.

## First case: use of the `BehaviourData` data structure

Starting from a behaviour, one can allocate all the memory required to
treat one integration point:

~~~~{.cxx}
auto d = BehaviourData{b};
~~~~

The data members of the `BehaviourData` structure are very close to the
one of the `BehaviourDataView` class. In particular, it contains two
data members called `s0` and `s1` containing the state of integration
point.

> **Note**
>
> The `BehaviourData` structure holds a reference to the behaviour. The
> use must be sure that the behaviour outlives the behaviour data.

### Creating a `BehaviourDataView` from a `BehaviourData`

The `make_view` function creates a `BehaviourDataView` from a
`BehaviourData`:

~~~~{.cxx}
auto v = make_view(d);
~~~~

### Retrieving the values of a specific variable

All the internal state variables are stored in a continuous array. If
one wish to retrieve the value of a specific state variable, one first
have to retrieve the offset of this variable as follows:

~~~~{.cxx}
const auto o = getVariableOffset(b.isvs, "EquivalentViscoplasticStrain",
                                 b.hypothesis);
~~~~

The same applies to material properties, external state variables, etc...

### Updating the date from one time step to the other

The `update` function overwrites the `s0` member, i.e. the state at the
beginning of the time step, with `s1`,  i.e. the state at the
end of the time step.

### Restarting a time step

The `revert` function overwrites the `s1` member, i.e. the state at the
end of the time step, with `s0`, i.e. the state at the beginning of the
time step.

## Second case: use of the `MaterialDataManager` structure

The `MaterialDataManager` data structure handle the data of a set of
integration points (generally representing a material, hence the name),
as follows:

~~~~{.cxx}
MaterialDataManager m{b, n};
~~~~

where `n` is the number of integration points.

> **Note**
>
> Note that to avoid copying, the move constructor, the copy
> constructor, the standard assignment and the move assignment
> of the `MaterialDataManager` have been disabled.

The `MaterialDataManager` structure has data members that have the same
names and meanings than those of the `BehaviourData` structure, except
that they holds the values of a set of integration points. In
particular, the `MaterialDataManager` structure contains two data
members called `s0` and `s1` containing the state of integration point.

### External memory management and the `MaterialDataManagerInitializer` class

By default, the `MaterialDataManager` automatically allocates the values
used to store all the data required.

However, one may want to use memory allocated by the solver. In this
case, one can have a look at the `MaterialDataManagerInitializer`
class.

### Updating the date from one time step to the other

The `update` function overwrites the `s0` member, i.e. the state at the
beginning of the time step, with `s1`,  i.e. the state at the
end of the time step.

### Restarting a time step

The `revert` function overwrites the `s1` member, i.e. the state at the
end of the time step, with `s0`, i.e. the state at the beginning of the
time step.

## Third case: manual allocation

The `MGIS` library provides a set of functions which allows the
developer to properly allocate the memory associated with the data
required at each integration point.

For example, if one wants to known the size of an array able to store
all the internal state variables of one integration point, one may use
the `getArraySize` function:

~~~~{.cxx}
const auto n = getArraySize(b.isvs, b.hypothesis);
~~~~

In the case of the plastic behaviour, there are two state variables: the
elastic strain, which is a symmetric tensor and the equivalent plastic
strain, which is a scalar. Thus, the value of `n` will be equal to `7`.

# Behaviour integration

Three overloads of the `integrate` function are available:

The first one has the following interface:

~~~~{.cxx}
int integrate(BehaviourDataView&, const Behaviour&);
~~~~

The user may refer to the `IntegrateTest.cxx` file to have an example on
how this use this version.

The second one takes a `MaterialDataManager` and performs the behaviour
integration on a range of integration points. The user may refer to the
`IntegrateTest2.cxx` file to have an example on how this use this second
overload.

The third overload is similar to the second one but also takes an
argument of the `ThreadPool` type allowing a parallelization of the
behaviour integration. The user may refer to the `IntegrateTest2b.cxx`
file to have an example on how this use this second overload.

> ** Note **
>
> The `integrate_debug` function can be used to generate debug files
> to analyse integration failures. See
> [this page](behaviour-integration-failure-analysis.html) for details.

# Support for behaviours' initialize functions {#sec:mgis:2.1:initialize_functions}

Since version 4.1, `MFront` behaviours can declare initialize functions
which are meant to initialize the state of the material.

The available initialize functions are described by the
`initialize_functions` member of the `Behaviour` class which associates
the name of the initialize function and a small data structure
containing:

- the pointer to the initialize function,
- the list of inputs of the initialize function, if any.

The `getInitializeFunctionVariablesArraySize` function returns the size
of an array able to contain the inputs an initialize function for an
integration point.

The `allocateInitializeFunctionVariables` functions return an array able
to store the inputs of an initialize function for a given integration
point or a set of integrations points.

The `executeInitializeFunction` functions execute an initialization
function on a unique integration point or a set of integration points.

> **Note**
>
> The `BehaviourDataView` class imposes that the initial state is immutable.
> Thus, initialize functions can thus only initialize the state of the material
> at the end of the time step. In most case, the call to the selected
> initialize functions shall be follow to a call to the `update` function.

# Support for behaviours' post-processings {#sec:mgis:2.1:postprocessings}

Since version 4.1, `MFront` behaviours can declare postprocessings which
are meant to process the state of the material after the behaviour
integration.

The available postprocessings are described by the `postprocessings`
member of the `Behaviour` class which associates the name of the
postprocessing and a small data structure containing:

- the pointer to the postprocessing,
- the list of outputs of the postprocessing.

The `getPostProcessingVariablesArraySize` function returns the size
of an array able to contain the outputs an postprocessing for an
integration point.

The `allocatePostProcessingVariables` functions return an array able to
store the outputs of a postprocessing for a given integration point or a
set of integrations points.

The `executePostProcessing` functions execute a postprocessing on a
unique integration point or a set of integration points.

# Orthotropic behaviours

Orthotropic behaviours require to handle the rotations between the
global frame and the material frame. This is described in depth
[here](orthotropic-behaviours.html).

# References