---
title: Installation guide
author: Thomas Helfer
date: 2025
lang: en-EN
numbersections: true
documentclass: article
from: markdown+tex_math_single_backslash
geometry:
  - margin=2cm
papersize: a4
link-citations: true
colorlinks: true
figPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
tabPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
secPrefixTemplate: "$$i$$"
eqnPrefixTemplate: "($$i$$)"
bibliography: bibliography.bib
---

# Installing from source

These are generic installation instructions. Building from source
requires `cmake` to be installed (<https://cmake.org/>).

## Overview

The simplest way to compile this package is:

1. `cd` to the directory containing the package's source code and type
  `cmake .` to configure the package for your system. This will build
  `MGIS` in place.

   However, we strongly recommend building `MGIS` out of the source
   tree as follows:
   
   - Create a `build` directory et go in this directory
   - Call `cmake <path_to_MGIS_SOURCES>` to configure the directory

   Useful options are listed below.

   Running `cmake` takes awhile.  While running, it prints some
   messages telling which features it is checking for.

2. Type `make` to compile the package.

3. Optionally, type `make check` to run any self-tests that come with
  the package.

4. Type `make install` to install the programs and any data files and
  documentation.

5. You can remove the program binaries and object files from the source
  code directory by typing `make clean`.

## Options

- `enable-c-bindings`: compiles the `C` bindings (default=OFF)
- `enable-fortran-bindings`: compiles bindings for the `Fortran2003`
  language (default=OFF)
- `enable-python-bindings`: compiles the `Python` bindings. This requires
  the `Boost/Python` library to be available (default=OFF)
- `enable-fenics-bindings`: compiles the `FEniCS` bindings. Those
  bindings are experimental and very limited. To use `MGIS` with
  `FEniCS`, usage of the `Python` bindings are encouraged.
- `enable-julia-bindings`: compiles the `Julia` bindings. This requires
  the `CxxWrap` library to be available.
- `enable-website`: generate the TFEL website (enabled by default if
  pandoc is found)
- `enable-portable-build`: do not use processor specific flags.
- `enable-static`: compiles static libraries
- `enable-doxygen-doc`: enable the generation of the API documentation
  using with `Doxygen`.

By default, the library tries to autodetect the TFEL libraries and
expects that a working version of TFEL is available in the
environnement. The `disable-tfel` option can be used to disable this
feature. The `TFEL_DIR` variable can be passed to `cmake` to help the
detection of the `TFEL` libraries: it must points to the `cmake` files
generated by the `TFEL` project.

## `cmake` usefull variables

- `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE`           : two values are supported `Release` and `Debug`
- `CASTEM_INSTALL_PATH`        : specify where the castem has been installed
- `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE`       : specify a tool chain file
- `Python_ADDITIONAL_VERSIONS` : select the `python` version to
  			         use. Note that only the major and minor
  			         version of python shall be passed, not
  			         the revision version or the detection
  			         fails.

# Installing using `spack`

`spack` is flexible package manager (https://spack.io/).

Installing `mgis` using `spack` shall be as easy as:

~~~~{.bash}
$ spack install mgis
~~~~

By default, the `c`, `python` and `fortran` bindings are installed. The
mgis package has numerous variants which allows customizing which
bindings must be built.

# Installing using `brew`

Installing `mgis` using `brew` shall be as easy as:

~~~~{.bash}
$ brew install mgis
~~~~